http://www.academia.edu/1207793/The_Collage_Aesthetic_Non_Linear_Narratives_and_Personal_Myth_Making

Curtis Jones

Dylan's version of "Highway 51" on his debut album was credited to bluesman Curtis Jones. What's curious about this is that it bears no particular resemblance to Jones' '38 contribution recorded for Vocalion. I haven't found any convincing explanation for this attribution. Maybe Dylan misinformed Columbia. Maybe Columbia had an interest in the publishing company. Honest mistake? We're talking about the record biz,mind you....ß


Lyrics



These lyrics have several features characteristic of Dylan's work:rhythmically complex phrasing, a disorienting collage narrative that tells a story without reliance on sequence,and deft usage of consonance,assonance, and alliteration. They are spooky, allusive, and inflected with sly humor throughout. 


While Dylan and McClennan open with hot pursuit of a love interest, Jones first pleas to an estranged lover for forgiveness -- perhaps only to avoid retribution. Verse 2 deals with the premature death/burial site motif and refers to train tracks -- "the Frisco line" -- as a gravesite landmark, conjoining morbid stasis with an elevated form of travel, ever-so-lightly alluding to the heaven-bound train of the saved so prevalent in gospel music of the period. In verse 3, Jones tries to freeload a bus ride. His request of the driver to ride "the blinds" refashions a stock blues folkore convention where the impvoverished would-be passenger petitions a train engineer or conductor to ride gratis in a covert, dangerous section of the train and is denied. Here Jones pre-empts the bus driver's anticipated response with the resolution to "swing right on behind" if denied passage. This is decades before skate boards or roller blades so it's hard to guess what transportation method he refers to, but the phrase does effectively convey his determination to ride the bus by whatever means neccessary, however dangerous. Abruptly moving from desperation to largesse, verse 4 finds Jones offering opulent assylum to a woman fleeing her unhinged boyfriend in the singer's mansion on the highway. Jones seques from confidence to despair in verse 5, the most diorienting and despondent of all. It recalls he and his woman walking together down Highway 51 in the A lines but this is answered in the B line with future-tense speculation of their unreported death in a bad accident. 

As with McClennan's "New Highway 51", the subject is simultaneously a road (and specifically a means of escape), a home (in this case a mansion), and a grave. The rich narrative collage is fashioned with skillful use of consonance, assonance, illiteration, internal rhyme, and judicious placement of some phrasing pyrotechnics. As an example of the latter, in the verse 1 B phrase we have:

"I don't want nobody have to come a-here for me"

...that's thirteen syllables evenly spaced and packed into two and a half quarter-note notes or 10 sixteenth notes-- a tricky 13:10 polyrhythm. This is a challenge to sing and hard to either improvise or compose. And he's accompanying himself with an independent ryhthm in his right hand and holding down the bass line in his left on the piano.


The verse 4 A1 phrase has this ingenious Chinese box of phonics:


BabY if your Good man Get BuggY


Starting from the endpoints, there is an internal rhyme between "Baby" and "Buggy" as well as consonance. The endpoints wrap another consonance between "Good" and "Get", which is also echoed in the end-word "buggy". In addition to intricate sound design, "buggy" puns on yet another means of travel.
 
 

Performance

Jones performance is characteristic of urban blues with its disicplined adherence to the 4/4 12-bar blues form througout. But he brilliantly plays against this predictable regularity with wild polyrhythmic excursions in both piano and vocal phrasing. 
Suffice to say, Jones was a superb blues piano player and a master of rhythtmic independence. His high,spectral tenor voice and somewhat unusual choice of minor key  add immensely to the tune's sustained spooky mood. 

This is a multi-valent travel song that re-invents folklore and subtly incants - land travel references notwithstanding - astral projection into the cosmic id.



A1:Forgive me /honey for all the wrong I've done
A2:Please forgive me/honey for all the wrong I've done
B:I don't want nobody have to (be) comin' for me/ whilst(?) out on highway 51


A1:If I should die/Baby, before my time ( playing with the sequence be-be -- playful in a way Dylan would pick up on)
A2:If I should die/baby before my time
B:bury my body on 51 highway/just down below the frisco line


A1:Now, Mister Bus Driver/let me ride down in your blinds
A2:Mister Bus Driver/let me ride down in your blinds
B:And if you don't let me ride, man/I'm gonna swing right on behind

A1:Baby if your good man get buggy/ Don't want you to have no fun
A2:If your man get buggy, Baby/Don't want you to have no fun
B:Come and follow me to my mansion/that's down on highway 51


 A1:Me and My Baby/We walked 51 Highway  side by side
 A1:Me and My little baby/ walked the highway side by side
 B:If we should have a bad accident, won't nobody know the death we died


