
"Wake Up Little Suzie" was a number one hit for Everly Brothers' in 1957 when Dylan was a Hibbing High School junior. The similarity between its opening guitar lick and the fernetic riff so fundamental to his instrumental arrangment of "Highway 51 Blues" strongly suggests the duo's influence. Dylan himself said: “We owe these guys everything.They started it all.”

Like Dylan, the Everly Brothers were deep into traditional American folk music. "Their unmistakble harmonies", writes Michael Grey, "drew on 700 years of Scottish borders' misery,transplanted via the Appalachians, to sing out late 1950's teenage confusion."

Grey has good reason to highlight the popular duo's roots music pedigree. In 1958, they released the album "Songs Our Daddy Taught Us", a selection of traditional folk songs learned as boys from their father, Ike Everly. Released at the peak of the duo's commercial success, the move was unexpeted and way ahead of its time. Rolling Stone noted that that not even Elvis Presley "had the nerve to do an album as rootsy" as this one."






despite having been banned from Boston radio stations for lyrics that, at the time, were considered suggestive, according to a 1986 interview with Don Everly.[2] "Wake Up Little Susie" also spent seven weeks atop the Billboard country chart[3] and got to number two on the UK Singles Chart. The song was ranked at #318 on the Rolling Stone magazine's list of The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time.[4]

In July, 1968, Bob Dylan was asked to write some songs for the film Midnight Cowboy, but submitted them too late for inclusion.  One of these compositions was "Lay Lady Lay."  In either late 1968 or early 1969, when  the Everly Brothers were playing New York's Bottom Line, Dylan visited backstage. Phil asked if Dylan had any new songs. Dylan picked up a guitar and softly sang "Lay Lady Lay."  The Everly's misheard the lyrics, so Don Everly  declined, saying, "Thank you, it's a great song, but I don't think we could get away with that."  In 1984, after the Everly Brothers reunited, they went into the studio with Dave Edmunds producing, and finally recorded "Lay Lady Lay," on the album, EB '84.   For their next album, Born Yesterday, the Everlys covered Dylan's "Abandoned Love." 


Shared a love of traditional music

"Their unmistakble harmonies drew on 700 years of Scottish borders' misery,transplanted via the Appalachians, to sing out late 1950's teenage confusion" -- Dylan Encyc. pg. 216



Songs Our Daddy Taught Us -- 

Songs Our Daddy Taught Us is the second album by close harmony country/rock and roll duo 

In April, 1969, Bob Dylan went into Columbia Music Row Studios in Nashville to start recording what turned out to be the 1970 double-album, Self Portrait. Among the songs Dylan tackled at the second and third sessions were a couple associated with the Everly Brothers - "Let It Be Me" and "Take A Message To Mary."  Dylan later revisited "Let It Be Me," in 1981, for a European single B-side.  Also, while jamming with George Harrison on May 1, 1970, Dylan covered "All I Have To Do Is Dream." This Everly Brothers classic may have been the inspiration for Dylan's "Basement Tapes" out-take, "All You Have To Do Is Dream."


http://youtu.be/uPvIgIIM6vU

http://youtu.be/ElgBQLcmPL0
