highway 51 from liner notes:
A diesel-tempoed "Highway 51" is of a type sung by the Everly Brothers, partially rewritten by Dylan. His guitar is tuned to an open tuning and features a particularly compelling vamping figure. Similarly up tempo is his version of "Gospel Plow," which turns the old spiritual into a virtually new song


overview quote:
For the migrant Negro... the long ribbons of the "odd" numbered highways have a magnetic fascination.... He sings of Highway 49.... Often he sings of Highway 61... or of its fellow, Highway 51, on whose hard causeway countless thousands of flapping soles and bare black feet have made no indentation.... These are the best-known routes to the Southern Negroes...
Paul Oliver, The Meaning of the Blues, New York, 1963, pp. 82-83.


Curtis Jones

Highway 51 was credited to Curtis Jones on "Bob Dylan". What's curious about this is that Dylan's version bears no significant resemblance to Jones' '38 contribution recorded for Vocalion:both lyrics and musical arrangment are vastly different. I haven't found any convincing explanation for this attribution. Maybe Dylan misinformed Columbia. Maybe Columbia had an interest in the publishing company. Who knows? 


Lyrics
While Dylan and McClennan start off in hot pursuit of a love interest, Jones opens with a plea to an estranged lover for forgiveness -- perhaps only to avoid having to escape retribution for his wrongdoing:

A1:Forgive me /honey for all the wrong I've done
A2:Please forgive me/honey for all the wrong I've done
B:I don't want nobody have to (be) comin' for me/ whilst(?) out on highway 51


Verse 2 deals with the premature death/burial site motif: 

A1:If I should die/Baby, before my time ( playing with the sequence be-be -- playful in a way Dylan would pick up on)
A2:If I should die/baby before my time
B:bury my body on 51 highway/just down below the frisco line

It's interesting that the landmark is a railroad track -- the Frisco line -- perched above the highway. Whatever it's significance as a physical marker, the reference to train tracks conjures up the recurrent presence of locomotive travel in blues repertoire. 

In verse 3, Jones is trying to board a bus but still has trains on his mind:

A1:Now, Mister Bus Driver/let me ride down in your blinds
A2:Mister Bus Driver/let me ride down in your blinds
B:And if you don't let me ride, man/I'm gonna swing right on behind

His reference to "your blinds" borrows a term typically used in relation to hobo train travel to petition a bus driver to waive the fare for some covert,sketchy seating option. The hyperbolic B phrase -- though weirdly comic -- conveys the singer's desperation and the extreme risks he is willing to take to bum a ride. (This is decades before skate boards or rollerblades mind you).

Abruptly moving from desperation to largesse, Jones in verse 4 offers opulent assylum to a woman fleeing her unhinged boyfriend:

A1:Baby if your good man get buggy/ Don't want you to have no fun
A2:If your man get buggy, Baby/Don't want you to have no fun
B:Come and follow me to my mansion/that's down on highway 51

 McClennan also has a similar verse in his "New Highway 51". "Buggy" -- a synonym for crazy -- is perhpas a pun on yet another mode of transportation. Another remarkable feature of this verse is its ingenious use of compound, enveloped, alliteration with a pair of B's wrapping a pair of G's:
 
 Baby if your Good man Get Buggy

 ... and the "B" words provide an internal rhyme with their assonant "eeee" endings.

 Jones uses collage rather than linear logic to sequence the lyrics but the overall flow feels more deliberate than spontaneous. As with McClennan, Highway 51 is simultaneously a road (and specifically a means of escape), a home (in this case a mansion), and a grave. 






Performance

Jones performance is characteristic of urban blues with its strict adherence to the 4/4 12-bar blues form througout. But he brilliantly plays against this predictable regularity with wild polyrhythmic excursions in both piano and vocal phrasing. His vocal flights are particularly remarkable. For example in the first part of the B section of verse 1 we have:

"I don't want nobody have to come a-here for me"

...that's thirteen syllables evenly spaced and packed into two and a half beats -- a tricky 13:5 polyrhythm. This is a challenge to sing and hard to compose. And he's accompanying himself with an independent ryhthm in his right hand and holding down the bass line in his left.

Suffice to say, Jones was an excellent piano player. His high,spectral tenor voice and somewhat unusual choice of minor key  add immensely to the tune's sustained spooky mood. This is certainly a travel song, and - despite all the terrestrial vehicles references - it feels like an out of body experience.


